# Chapter 2 of DOET

this starts on page 56 of the pdf and ends on page 92 (yay lots of reading :( )

### Personal Thoughts

This reading made me think about design as a whole and how it ties into human psychology. So there are two gulfs that must be bridged: the bridge of execution and the bridge of evaluation. Execution is how it operates and evaluation is trying to figure out what happened. If there is any difficulty in figuring out how something works, it is the problem of the designer, not the people attempting to use the item. To bridge the two gulfs together, you must look further into human psychology. 

If someone is experienced at a certain thing like driving, the driver wouldn't need to think much about turning but if the driver is inexperienced, the driver needs to think about every little thing before the turn is finished. In other words, the task is much more monumental if it is something you aren't very experienced or good at. Another thing is root cause analysis, which the why of the activity performed. If the end goal is going to bed, some subgoals would be to brush your teeth, changing to pajamas, and making sure the room is dark enough to sleep. 

The human mind is interesting in that most of the brain's operations are subconscious and only the highest level (reflective) that is conscious. We need to be conscious about what we are learning but after continued learning/studying over a long period of time, the activity becomes second nature to you as you pull of doing the activity effortlessly. When asked to do that thing you've been doing for ages, the answer on how to accomplish that goal just comes to you without any awareness of how it happened. This is true as I can draw circles very well as I've been drawing human heads for a long time but when asked to recount what I've read, the response isn't automatic and I oftentimes forget what I was reading. 

We may think all thoughts are conscious but they are not. Same goes for thoughts and emotions. Cognitive thoughts lead to emotions and emotions drive cognitive thoughts. It is our emotions that helps determine our moral compass as well as how safe a situation is. Subconscious thoughts matches the patterns we live in our daily lives and good at determining general trends. Conscious thoughts are slow and labored where we will think long and hard about different choices, forming logical solutions, and finding explanations. Both are powerful and essential aspects of human life but also flawed. 

Visceral is the most basic level of processing and it is part of the basic protective mechanisms of our bodies. It allows us to react to dangerous situations and do it quickly. Due to how fast it is, it is subconscious. Reflection on the other hand is a slow process that occurs after said event. Emotions come out at the highest level where causes are assigned and future predictions take place. To a designer, reflection is the most important level of processing and these memories are often more important than reality. Bad memories may overwrite the good and vice versa. As such this phase is when people assign blame for something as something must have caused said event. 

Learned helplessness explains how self blame happens. It is when people experience repeated failure at a task and since after many attempts of the task not being finished, they think the task can't be done and are therefore helpless. They stop trying and have difficulties coping in life. Sometimes all it takes are a few bad experiences for this behavior to occur. When this happens to a product the person is using, it is the failure of the designer and not the person, leading to false blame on the user. This self failure thought happens to me quite often as I often fail at things that I do but don't take the effort to fix it, leading to continued learned helplessness. As there are failures that reinforce bad feelings onto ourselves, opposite is true as well. In order for that to happen, failure must be removed from our vocabulary and view it as a learning experience or an interesting challenge. Scientists know this positive reinforcement very well as they are used to failure and these failures often become learning experiences for them. I rarely have this feeling and when I do, it is usually because I finished a long time project or do a full combo on a difficult song that I had trouble with for months. It is a really good feeling and it is something I should keep in mind more often though more often than not, negative emotions overwhelm me. 
